Interpreting CNNs via Decision Trees
Quanshi Zhang , Yu Yang , Haotian Ma , and Ying Nian Wu 
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
 University of California, Los Angeles,
 South China University of Technology
Abstract
This paper1 aims to quantitatively explain rationales of
each prediction that is made by a pre-trained convolutional
neural network (CNN). We propose to learn a decision tree,
which clari es the speci c reason for each prediction made
by the CNN at the semantic level. I.e. the decision tree
decomposes feature representations in high conv-layers of
the CNN into elementary concepts of object parts. In this
way, the decision tree tells people which object parts acti-
vate which  lters for the prediction and how much they con-
tribute to the prediction score. Such semantic and quantita-
tive explanations for CNN predictions have speci c values
beyond the traditional pixel-level analysis of CNNs. More
speci cally, our method mines all potential decision modes
of the CNN, where each mode represents a common case of
how the CNN uses object parts for prediction. The decision
tree organizes all potential decision modes in a coarse-to-
 ne manner to explain CNN predictions at different  ne-
grained levels. Experiments have demonstrated the effec-
tiveness of the proposed method.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 18, 14] have
achieved superior performance in various tasks. However,
besides the discrimination power, model interpretability is
still a signi cant challenge for neural networks. Many stud-
ies have been proposed to visualize or analyze feature rep-
resentations hidden inside a CNN, in order to open the black
box of neural networks.
Motivation & objective: In the scope of network inter-
pretability, state-of-the-art algorithms are still far from the
ultimate goal of explaining why a CNN learns knowledge as
it is. Although some theories, such as the information bot-
tleneck [34], analyzed statistical characteristics of a neural
1Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author with the John Hopcroft
Center and the MoE Key Lab of Arti cial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Yu Yang and Ying Nian Wu are
with the University of California, Los Angeles, USA. Haotian Ma is with
the South China University of Technology, China.
Tail
...
Explanatory 
tree
y=0.87
(b) grad-CAM
(a) Input
(c) Visualization of filters
(d) Our explanations
Conv5-2
Conv3-3
Figure 1. Different types of explanations for CNNs. We compare
(d) our task of quantitatively and semantically explaining CNN
predictions with previous studies of interpreting CNNs, such as
(b) the grad-CAM [26] and (c) CNN visualization [23]. Given an
input image (a), we infer a parse tree (green lines) within the deci-
sion tree to project neural activations onto clear concepts of object
parts. Our method quantitatively explains which  lters/parts (in
the small/big round) are used for the prediction and how much
they contribute to the prediction. We visualize numerical contri-
butions from randomly selected 10%  lters for clarity.
network, it is still a challenge to explain why a CNN en-
codes frontal-leg features, rather than rear-leg features, for
classi cation during the end-to-end learning process.
Therefore, in this study, we limit our discussion to the
issue of explaining what knowledge a CNN learns. In this
direction, our research focuses on the following two new
perspectives of interpreting CNNs:
  How to explain features of a middle layer in a CNN
at the semantic level.
I.e.
we aim to transform
chaotic features of  lters inside a CNN into seman-
tically meaningful concepts, such as object parts, so
as to help people to understand the knowledge in the
CNN.
  How to quantitatively analyze the rationale of each
CNN prediction.
We need to  gure out which  l-
ters/parts pass their appearance information through
the CNN and contribute to the prediction output. We
1
arXiv:1802.00121v2  [cs.CV]  25 Feb 2019
...
Most 
generic 
rationales
(our target)
Most 
specific 
rationales
Mode of long-neck birds
Mode of standing birds
Disentangled 
filters in the top 
conv-layer
y=0.9
...
FC 
layers
A head filter
A feet filter
A torso filter
contribute 2.32%
contribute 0.72%
contribute 1.21%
Figure 2. Decision tree that encodes all potential decision modes
of the CNN in a coarse-to- ne manner. We learn a CNN for object
classi cation with disentangled representations in the top conv-
layer, where each  lter represents an object part. Given an input
image, we infer a parse tree (green lines) from the decision tree
to semantically and quantitatively explain which object parts (or
 lters) are used for the prediction and how much an object part
(or  lter) contributes to the prediction. We are more interested in
high-layer decision modes that summarize low-layer modes into
compact explanations of CNN predictions.
also report the numerical contribution of each  lter (or
object part) to the output score.
As shown in Fig. 1, above two perspectives are crucial in
real applications and have essential differences from tradi-
tional pixel-level visualization and diagnosis of CNN fea-
tures [37, 23, 10, 24, 22]. Our semantic and quantitative
explanations for CNNs have potential values beyond pixel-
level visualization/analysis of CNNs. Semantic and quan-
titative explanations can help people better understand and
trust CNN predictions. E.g. in critical applications, such as
the recommendation for a surgery plan, people are usually
not simply satis ed by the plan itself, but expect a quantita-
tive explanation for the plan.
However, bridging the gap between a CNN s middle-
layer features and semantic explanations has not been well
explored yet. We will introduce our task, clarify its chal-
lenges, and de ne relevant concepts from the following two
perspectives.
1. Bridging middle-layer features with semantic con-
cepts:
Given an input image, the  rst issue is to
learn more interpretable feature representations inside
a CNN and associate each neural activation inside a
CNN with a semantic concept. This presents signi -
cant challenges for state-of-the-art algorithms.
Firstly, we need to force feature representations in middle
conv-layers to be well disentangled during the learning pro-
cess. According to [2, 38]2, a  lter in traditional CNNs usu-
2Zhang et al. [40] summarized the six types of semantics de ned in [2]
as parts and textures.
ally represents a mixture of parts and textures. Learning
semantically meaningful  lters is dif cult but is the foun-
dation of semantic-level explanations. In this research, we
learn a CNN with disentangled  lters in high conv-layers.
Each  lter needs to be consistently activated by the same
object region over different input images. We do not use
any annotations of parts or textures to supervise the disen-
tanglement of  lter features.
Secondly, we also need to associate each disentangled
 lter with an explicit semantic meaning (i.e.
an object
part in this study). This enables linguistic descriptions of
middle-layer knowledge, for example, how many parts are
memorized in the CNN and how the parts are organized.
2. Bridging middle-layer features with  nal CNN predic-
tions: When we have assigned middle-layer features
with speci c part concepts, the next issue is to quanti-
tatively explain how the CNN uses these middle-layer
features to compute prediction scores. In other words,
given an input image, we hope to clarify the speci c
rationale of the CNN prediction.
Here, we de ne the rationale of a CNN prediction as the set
of object parts (or  lters) that are activated and contribute to
the prediction. Given different input images, the CNN uses
different object parts to activate different sets of  lters to
compute prediction scores, thereby having different ratio-
nales. Let us take the bird classi cation as an example. The
CNN may use several  lters activated by the head appear-
ances as rationales to classify a standing bird, and the CNN
may take  lters for wings to distinguish a  ying bird.
Given each input image, our task is to clarify  lters of
which object parts are activated and to quantitatively mea-
sure the contribution of each object part to the prediction.
The concept of the contribution was also called the  impor-
tance  in [24, 22] and was termed  attribution  in [16]. As
shown in Fig. 2, we describe the contribution as  a head  l-
ter contributes 2.32%, and a feet  lter contributes 0.72%. 
Task: As shown in Fig. 1, given a pre-trained CNN, we
propose a method to construct a decision tree to explain
CNN predictions semantically and quantitatively. We sum-
marize rationales of CNN predictions on all images into var-
ious decision modes. Each tree node represents a decision
mode. Each decision mode describes common rationales
of predictions that are shared by multiple images. I.e. for
these images, the CNN usually activates similar  lters (ob-
ject parts), and each part makes a similar contribution to the
prediction.
The decision tree hierarchically represents all potential
decision modes of a CNN in a coarse-to- ne manner. Nodes
near to the tree root node mainly represent most common
decision modes (prediction rationales) shared by many im-
ages. Nodes near leaves correspond to  ne-grained modes
of minority images. In particular, each leaf node encodes
the speci c decision mode of a certain image.
In order to build the decision tree, we learn  lters to rep-
resent object parts (we do not label any parts or textures as
additional supervision3). Then, we assign each  lter with
a certain part name. Finally, we mine decision modes to
explain how the CNN use parts/ lters for prediction, and
construct a decision tree.
Inference: When the CNN makes a prediction for an
input image, the decision tree determines a parse tree (see
green lines in Fig. 2) to encode a series of explanations.
Each node (decision mode) in the parse tree quantitatively
explains the prediction at a certain abstraction level, i.e.
clarifying how much each object part/ lter contributes to
the prediction score.
Compared to  ne-grained modes in leave nodes, we are
more interested in generic decision modes in high-level
nodes. Generic decision modes usually select signi cant
object parts ( lters) as the rationale of CNN predictions and
ignore insigni cant ones. Thus, generic decision modes re-
 ect compact rationales for CNN predictions.
Contributions: In this paper, we aim to bridge CNN
representations with semantic visual concepts, in order to
explain CNN predictions quantitatively and semantically.
We propose to learn the decision tree without strong super-
vision for explanations. Our method is a generic approach
and has been successfully applied to various benchmark
CNNs. Experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness
of our method.
2. Related work
In this section, we limit our discussion to the litera-
ture of opening the black box of CNN representations.
[2, 21, 9, 4] discussed the de nition of interpretability from
different perspectives with respect to different tasks. Zhang
et al. [43] made a survey for the interpretability of deep vi-
sual models.
CNN visualization:
Visualization of  lters in a CNN is
the most direct way of exploring the pattern hidden inside a
neural unit. Gradient-based visualization [37, 23] estimates
the input image that maximizes the activation score of a
neural unit. Up-convolutional nets [10] invert feature maps
of conv-layers into images. Unlike gradient-based methods,
up-convolutional nets cannot mathematically ensure that the
visualization result re ects actual neural representations.
Zhou et al. [44] proposed a method to accurately com-
pute the image-resolution receptive  eld of neural activa-
tions in a feature map. The estimated receptive  eld of a
neural activation is smaller than the theoretical receptive
 eld based on the  lter size. The accurate estimation of the
3Part annotations are not used to learn the CNN and the decision tree.
Given the learned CNN, we label object parts for the  lters to compute
part-level contributions in Equation (11).
receptive  eld is crucial to understand a  lter s representa-
tions. Bau et al. [2] further de ned six types of semantics
for CNNs, i.e. objects, parts, scenes, textures, materials,
and colors. Zhang et al. [38] summarized the six types of
semantics into  parts  and  textures.  Nevertheless, each
 lter in a CNN represents a mixture of semantics. [45] ex-
plained semantic reasons for visual recognition.
Network diagnosis:
Going beyond visualization, some
methods diagnose a pre-trained CNN to obtain insight un-
derstanding of CNN representations.
Fong and Vedaldi [11] analyzed how multiple  lters
jointly represented a certain semantic concept. Yosinski et
al. [36] evaluated the transferability of  lters in intermedi-
ate conv-layers. Aubry et al. [1] computed feature distri-
butions of different categories in the CNN feature space.
Selvaraju et al. [26] and Fong et al. [12] propagated gradi-
ents of feature maps w.r.t. the CNN loss back to the image,
in order to estimate image regions that directly contribute
the network output. The LIME [24] and SHAP [22] ex-
tracted image regions that were used by a CNN to predict
a label. Zhang et al. [41] used an explainer network to in-
terpret object-part representations in intermediate layers of
CNNs.
Network-attack methods [17, 30] diagnosed network
representations by computing adversarial samples for a
CNN. In particular, in uence functions [17] were proposed
to compute adversarial samples, provide plausible ways to
create training samples to attack the learning of CNNs,
 x the training set, and further debug representations of
a CNN. Lakkaraju et al. [19] discovered knowledge blind
spots (unknown patterns) of a pre-trained CNN in a weakly-
supervised manner. The study of [39] examined represen-
tations of conv-layers and automatically discover potential,
biased representations of a CNN due to the dataset bias.
CNN semanticization:
Compared to the diagnosis of
CNN representations, some studies aim to learn more mean-
ingful CNN representations. Some studies extracted neu-
ral units with certain semantics from CNNs for different
applications. Given feature maps of conv-layers, Zhou et
al. [44] extracted scene semantics. Simon et al. mined ob-
jects from feature maps of conv-layers [27], and learned ob-
ject parts [28]. The capsule net [25] used a dynamic routing
mechanism to parse the entire object into a parsing tree of
capsules. Each output dimension of a capsule in the net-
work may encode a speci c meaning. Zhang et al. [40] pro-
posed to learn CNNs with disentangled intermediate-layer
representations. The infoGAN [6] and  -VAE [15] learned
interpretable input codes for generative models. Zhang et
al. [42] learned functionally interpretable, modular struc-
tures for neural networks via network transplanting.
Decision trees for neural networks:
Distilling knowl-
edge from neural networks into tree structures is an emerg-
ing direction [13, 31, 5], but the trees did not explain the net-
Filter 1
Filter 2
Filter 3
Ordinary filters
Disentangled filters
Figure 3. Comparisons between ordinary CNN feature maps and
disentangled feature maps that are used in this study. We visualize
image regions corresponding to each feature map based on [44].
work knowledge at a human-interpretable semantic level.
Wu et al. [35] learned a decision tree via knowledge dis-
tillation to represent the output feature space of an RNN,
in order to regularize the RNN for better representations.
Vaughan et al. [32] distilled knowledge into an additive
model for explanation.
In spite of the use of tree structures, there are two main
differences between the above two studies and our research.
Firstly, we focus on using a tree to semantically explain
each prediction made by a pre-trained CNN. In contrast, de-
cision trees in above studies are mainly learned for classi -
cation and cannot provide semantic-level explanations. Sec-
ondly, we summarize decision modes from gradients w.r.t.
neural activations of object parts as rationales to explain
CNN prediction. Compared to above  distillation-based 
methods, our  gradient-based  decision tree re ects CNN
predictions more directly and strictly.
3. Image-speci c rationale of a CNN prediction
In this section, we design a method to simplify the com-
plex feature processing inside a CNN into a linear form
(i.e. Equation (3)), as the speci c rationale of the predic-
tion w.r.t. the input image. This clari es (i) which object
parts activate which  lters in the CNN and (ii) how much
these parts/ lters contribute to the  nal prediction score.
In order to obtain semantic-level rationale of a CNN pre-
diction, we need (i)  rst to ensure that the CNN s middle-
layer features are semantically meaningful, and (ii) then to
extract explicit contributions of middle-layer features to the
prediction score.
In this study, we learn the CNN for object classi cation.
Theoretically, we can interpret CNNs oriented to different
tasks. Nevertheless, in this paper, we limit our attention to
CNNs for classi cation, in order to simplify the story.
3.1. Learning disentangled  lters
The basic idea is to revise a benchmark CNN, in order
to make each  lter in the top conv-layer represent a speci c
object part. We expect the  lter to be automatically con-
verged to the representation of a part, instead of using addi-
tional part annotations to supervise the learning process.
We apply the  lter loss [40] to each  lter in the top conv-
layer to push the  lter towards the representation of an ob-
ject part. As shown in Fig. 3, the  lter is learned to be acti-
vated by the same object part given different input images.
Theoretically, our method also supports other techniques
of mining interpretable features in middle layers [38, 27].
Nevertheless, the  lter loss usually ensures more meaning-
ful features than the other approaches.
Filter loss: Let xf  RL L denote the feature map of
a  lter f. Without part annotations, the  lter loss forces xf
to be exclusively activated by a speci c part of a category.
We can summarize the  lter loss as the minus mutual infor-
mation between the distribution of feature maps and that of
part locations.
Lossf =
X
xf  Xf Lossf(xf) =  MI(Xf; P)
=  
X
 Pp( )
X
xf  Xf p(xf| ) log p(xf| )
p(xf)
(1)
where MI( ) indicates the mutual information. Xf denotes
a set of feature maps of f extracted from different input
images. P = { |  = [h, w], 1  h, w  L}  { } is referred
to as a set of all part-location candidates. Each location   =
[h, w] corresponds to an activation unit in xf. Besides,  
P denotes the case that the target part does not appear in the
input image. In this case, all units in xf are expected to keep
inactivated. The joint probability p(xf,  ) to describe the
compatibility between xf and   (please see [40] for details).
The  lter loss ensures that given an input image, xf
should match only one of all L2+1 location candidates. It is
assumed that repetitive shapes on various regions are more
likely to describe low-level textures than high-level parts. If
the part appears, xf should have a single activation peak at
the part location; otherwise, xf should keep inactivated.
3.2. Quantitative rationales of CNN predictions
As analyzed in [2],  lters in high conv-layers are more
prone to represent object parts, while those in low conv-
layers usually describe textures. Therefore, we choose  l-
ters in the top conv-layer to represent object parts. Con-
sequently, we quantitatively analyze how fully-connected
(FC) layers use object-part features from the top conv-layer
to make  nal predictions, as the rationale.
Given an input image I, let x  RL L D denote the
feature map of the top conv-layer after a ReLU operation,
where L denotes the height/width of the feature map, and
D is the  lter number. Let y denote the scalar classi cation
score of a certain category before the softmax operation (al-
though the CNN is usually learned for multiple categories).
Our task is to use x to represent the rationale of y.
As discussed in [22, 24], we can use a piecewise linear
representation to represent the function of cascaded FC lay-
ers and ReLU layers, as follows.
y = ffc-n(frelu(      ffc-1(x))) =
X
h,w,d
g(h,w,d)   x(h,w,d) + b (2)
Filter 1:
Filter 2:
 
Filter D-1:
Filter D:
head pattern
torso pattern
feet pattern
tail pattern
...
u
v
v 
u
 
...
u
v v 
u 
...
v v 
0
Q P
 
1
P
2
P
...
Figure 4. Process of learning a decision tree. Green lines in P3
indicate a parse tree to explain the rationale of the prediction on an
image.
where x(h,w,d)  R denotes the element at the location
(h, w) of the d-th channel; g(h,w,d) is a weight that describes
the importance of x(h,w,d) for the prediction on I. Theoreti-
cally, we can compute g =  y
 x and b=y  g  x.
We use weights g to denote the speci c rationale of the
prediction for the input image.
g(h,w,d)x(h,w,d) measures
x(h,w,d) s quantitative contribution to the prediction.
Different input images correspond to different weights
g, i.e. different rationales of their CNN predictions. It is
because different images have various signal passing routes
through ReLU layers. Given an input images I, the CNN
uses certain weight values that are speci c to I.
Because each interpretable  lter only has a single activa-
tion peak [40], we can further compute vectors x, g  RD
as an approximation to the tensors x,  y
 x  RL L D to sim-
plify the computation. We get x(d) =
1
sd
P
h,w x(h,w,d) and
g(d) = sd
L2
P
h,w
 y
 x(h,w,d) , where x(d) denotes the d-th ele-
ment of x. sd = EIEh,w x(h,w,d) is used to normalize the
activation magnitude of the d-th  lter.
In this way, we can consider x and g to represent predic-
tion rationales4, i.e. using which  lters/parts for prediction.
y  gT x + b
(3)
Different dimensions of the vector x measure the scalar
signal strength of different object parts, since a  lter poten-
tially represents a certain object part. g corresponds to the
selection of object parts for the CNN prediction.
4. Learning a decision tree
We learn a decision tree to interpret the classi cation of
each category. In the following two subsections, we  rst
de ne basic concepts in a decision tree and then introduce
the learning algorithm.
4Without loss of generality, we normalize g to a unit vector for more
convincing results: y  y/ g , g g/ g , and b b/ g .
Algorithm 1 Learning a decision tree for a category
Input: 1. A CNN with disentangled  lters, 2. training
images  =  +  .
Output: A decision tree.
Initialize a tree Q = P0 and set t = 0
for each image Ii, i  + do
Initialize a child of the root of the initial tree Q by
setting g=gi based on Equation (3) and  =1.
end for
for t = t + 1 until  log E  0 do
1. Choose (v, v ) in the second tree layer of Pt 1 that
maximize  log E based on Equation (8)
2. Merge (v, v ) to generate a new node u based on
Equations (5) and (6), and obtain the tree Pt.
end for
Assign  lters with semantic object parts to obtain A.
4.1. Decision tree
Let us focus on the decision tree for a certain category.
We consider images of this category as positive images and
consider other images as negative images.  + denotes im-
age indexes of the target category, i.e. positive images, and
 =  +  represents all training images. For an image
Ii (i  ), yi denotes the classi cation score of the target
category before the softmax layer.
As shown in Fig. 2, each node v in the decision tree en-
codes a decision mode that is hidden inside FC layers of the
CNN. A decision mode represents a common rationale of
the prediction shared by a group of positive training images
 v  +. The decision tree organizes the hierarchy of deci-
sion modes in a coarse-to- ne manner from the root node to
leaf nodes. Children nodes v   Child(v) divides the parent
v s decision mode into  ne-grained modes. Fine-grained
modes are shared by sub-groups of images.
Just like the rationale de ned in Equation (3), the deci-
sion mode in node v is parameterized with w and b, and
the mode explains predictions on a certain set of images  v.
For each image Ii, i  v, the decision mode is given as
hv(xi) = wT xi + b,
w =    g
(4)
max
g
P
i vcosine(gi, g),
s.t. gT g = 1
(5)
min ,b
1
 v 
P
i v(wT xi + b  yi)2 +  1
(6)
where w is referred to as the rationale of the decision mode.
g is a unit vector ( g 2 =1) that re ects common rationales
that are shared by all images in  v.    {0, 1}D is given
as a binary selection of  lters in the decision mode.  de-
note element-wise multiplications. We compute sparse   to
obtain sparse explanations for the decision mode5.
In particular, when v is a leaf node, the decision mode
is formulated as the rationale of a speci c image Ii. I.e.
  = [1, 1, . . . , 1]T and w =  gi = gi, which is computed
in Equation (3).
4.2. Learning decision trees
Just like hierarchical clustering, the basic idea of learn-
ing a decision tree is to summarize common generic deci-
sion modes from speci c decision modes of different im-
ages. Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of the learning
process. At the beginning, we initialize the decision mode
gi of each positive image Ii as a leaf node by setting g=gi
and   = 1. Thus, we build an initial tree Q as shown in
Fig. 4, in which the root node takes decision modes of all
positive images as children. Then, in each step, we select
and merge two nodes v, v   V in the second tree layer (i.e.
children of the root node) to obtain a new node u, where V
denotes the children set of the root. u becomes a new child
of the root node, and v and v  are re-assigned as u s chil-
dren. The image set of u is de ned as  u =  v  v  and
we learn  , b, g for u based on Equations (5) and (6).
In this way, we gradually revise the initial tree P0 = Q
towards the  nal tree after T merging operations as
Q = P0  P1  P2        PT =  P
(7)
We formulate the objective for learning as follows.
max
P
E,
E =
Q
i + P(xi)
Q
i + Q(xi)
|
{z
}
Discrimination power
  e V  
| {z }
Sparsity of
decision modes
(8)
where P(xi) denotes the likelihood of xi being positive
that is estimated by the tree P. Q
i P(xi) indicates the dis-
criminative power of P.   is a scaling parameter5. This ob-
jective penalizes the decrease of the discriminative power
and encourages the system to summarize a few decision
modes as generic explanations for CNN predictions. We
compute the likelihood of xi being positive as
P(xi) = e h(xi)/
X
j e h(xj)
(9)
where  h(xi)=h v(xi) denotes the prediction on xi based on
best child  v  V in the second tree layer.   is a constant
scaling parameter5.
In the t-th step, we merge two nodes v, v   V in the sec-
ond tree layer of Pt 1 to get a new node u, thereby obtain-
ing a new tree Pt. We can easily compute  log E w.r.t. each
pair of (v, v ) based on Equation (8). Thus, we learn the de-
cision tree via a greedy strategy. In each step, we select and
merge the nodes v, v   V that maximize
 log E
 v + v   . We
normalize  log E for reasonable clustering performance.
4.3. Interpreting CNNs
Given a testing image Ii, the CNN makes a prediction
yi. The decision tree estimates quantitative decision modes
5Please see the experiment section for settings of  ,  , and  .
of the prediction at different  ne-grained levels. During the
inference procedure, we can infer a parse tree, which starts
from the root node, in a top-down manner. Green lines in
Fig. 4 show a parse tree. When we select the decision mode
in the node u as the rationale, we can further select its child
 v that maximizes the compatibility with the most speci c
rationale gi as a more  ne-grained mode:
 v = argmaxv Child(u)cosine(gi, wv)
(10)
where we add the subscript v to differentiate the parameter
of v from parameters of other nodes.
A node v in the parse tree provides the rationale of the
prediction on image Ii at a certain  ne-grained level. We
compute the vector  i and  i to evaluate the contribution of
different  lters and that of different object parts.
 i = wv  xi,
 i = A i
(11)
where the d-th element of  i  RD,  (d)
i , denotes the contri-
bution to the CNN prediction that is made by the d-th  lter.
If  (d)
i
> 0, then the d-th object part makes a positive con-
tribution. If  (d)
i
< 0, then the d-th  lter makes a negative
contribution. Based on visualization results in Figs. 3 and
6, we label a matrix A  {0, 1}M D to assign each  lter in
the top conv-layer with a speci c object part, where M is
the part number. Each  lter is assigned to a certain part, and
the annotation cost is O(M). Similarly, the m-th element of
 i  RM,  (m)
i
measures the contribution of the m-th part.
5. Experiments
Implementation details:
We learned four types of
disentangled CNNs based on structures of four bench-
mark CNNs, including the AlexNet [18], the VGG-M net-
work [29], the VGG-S network [29], the VGG-16 net-
work [29]. Note that as discussed in [40], the  lter loss
in the explainer is not compatible with skip connections
in residual networks [14]. We followed the technique of
[40] to modify an ordinary CNN to a disentangled CNN,
which changed the top conv-layer of the CNN to a disen-
tangled conv-layer and further added a disentangled conv-
layer on the top conv-layer. We used feature maps of the
new top conv-layer as the input of our decision tree. We
loaded parameters of all old conv-layers directly from the
CNN that was pre-trained using images in the ImageNet
ILSVRC 2012 dataset [8] with a loss for 1000-category
classi cation.
We initialized parameters of the new top
conv-layer and all FC layers. Inspired by previous stud-
ies of [40], we can weaken the problem of multi-category
classi cation as a number of single-category classi cation
to simplify the evaluation of interpretability. Thus, we  ne-
tuned the CNN for binary classi cation of a single category
from random images with the log logistic loss using three
benchmark datasets. We simply set parameters as   = 1,
  =1/Ei +[yi], and  =10 6p
 v in all experiments for
fair comparisons.
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Figure 5. Visualization of decision modes corresponding to nodes in the 2nd tree layer. We show typical images of each decision mode.
Input
Activation 
distribution
Contribution 
distribution
Input
Activation 
distribution
Contribution 
distribution
Filter for 
cat torso
Filter for 
cat head
Filter for 
bird breast
Filter for 
bird nape
Image receptive fields of a filter on different images
Figure 6. Object-part contributions for CNN prediction. Pie charts show contribution proportions of different parts, which are estimated
using nodes in the second tree layer. Heat maps indicate spatial distributions of neural activations in the top conv-layer (note that the
heat maps do not represent distributions of  contributions,  because neural activations are not weighted by gi). Right  gures show image
receptive  elds of different  lters estimated by [44]. Based on these receptive  lters, we assign the  lters with different object parts to
compute the distribution of object-part contributions.
Datasets: Because the quantitative explanation of CNN
predictions requires us to assign each  lter in the top conv-
layer with a speci c object part, we used three bench-
mark datasets with ground-truth art annotations to evaluate
our method. The selected datasets include the PASCAL-
Part Dataset [7], the CUB200-2011 dataset [33], and the
ILSVRC 2013 DET Animal-Part dataset [38].
Just like
in most part-localization studies [7, 38], we used animal
categories, which prevalently contain non-rigid shape de-
formation, for evaluation.
I.e.
we selected six animal
categories bird, cat, cow, dog, horse, and sheep from
the PASCAL Part Dataset. The CUB200-2011 dataset con-
tains 11.8K images of 200 bird species. Like in [3, 28],
we ignored species labels and regarded all these images as
a single bird category. The ILSVRC 2013 DET Animal-
Part dataset [38] consists of 30 animal categories among all
the 200 categories for object detection in the ILSVRC 2013
DET dataset [8].
Analysis of object parts for prediction: We analyzed
the contribution of different object parts in the CNN pre-
diction, when we assigned each  lter with a speci c ob-
ject part.
The vector  i in Equation (11) speci es the
contribution of different object parts in the prediction of
yi.
For the m-th object part, we computed contrim =
| (m)
i
|/PM
m =1 | (m )
i
| as the ratio of the part s contribution.
More speci cally, for CNNs based on the ILSVRC 2013
DET Animal-Part dataset, we manually labeled the object
part for each  lter in the top conv-layer. For CNNs based
on the Pascal VOC Part dataset [7], the study of [40] merged
tens of small parts into several major landmark parts for the
six animal categories. Given a CNN for a certain category,
we used [44] to estimate regions in different images that
corresponded to each  lter s neural activations, namely the
image receptive  eld of the  lter (please see Figs. 6 and
3). For each  lter, we selected a part from all major land-
mark parts, which was closest to the  lter s image receptive
 eld through all positive images. For the CNN based on the
CUB200-2011 dataset, we used ground-truth positions of
the breast, forehead, nape, tail of birds as major landmark
parts. Similarly, we assigned each  lter in the top conv-
layer with the nearest landmark part.
Evaluation metrics: The evaluation has two aspects.
Firstly, we use two metrics to evaluate the accuracy of the
estimated rationale of a prediction. The  rst metric eval-
uates errors of object-part contributions to the CNN pre-
diction that were estimated using nodes in the second tree
layer. Given an input image I,  i in Equation (11) denotes
the quantitative contribution of the i-th part. Accordingly,
 
i =y  yi is referred to as the ground-truth contribution of
the part, where y denotes the original CNN prediction on I;
 yi is the output when we removed neural activations from
feature maps ( lters) corresponding to the i-th part. In this
way, we used the deviation EI I[ i  
i ]/EI I[y] to de-
note the error of the i-th part contributions. Another metric,
namely the  tness of contribution distributions, compares
the ground-truth contribution distribution over different  l-
Dataset
2nd
5th
10th
50th
100th
ILSVRC Animal-Part
4.8
31.6
69.1
236.5
402.1
VOC Part
3.8
25.7
59.0
219.5
361.5
CUB200-2011
5.0
32.0
64.0
230.0
430.0
Table 1. Average number of nodes in the 2nd, 5th, 10th, 50th, and
100th layer of decision trees learned for VGG-16 nets.
ters in the top conv-layer with the estimated contribution
of these  lters during the prediction process.
When the
decision tree uses node  v to explain the prediction for Ii,
the vector  i in Equation (11) denotes the estimated con-
tribution distribution of different  lters. ti = gi  xi cor-
responds to the ground-truth contribution distribution. We
reported the interaction-of-the-union value between  i and
ti to measure the  tness of the ground-truth and the esti-
mated  lter contribution distributions. I.e. we computed
the  tness as Ei +[
min( (d)
i
,|t(d)
i
|)
max( (d)
i
,|t(d)
i
|)], where t(d)
i
denotes the
d-th element of ti and  (d)
i
= max{ (d)
i
sign(t(d)
i
), 0}. We
used non-negative values of  (d)
i
and |t(d)
i
|, because vectors
 i and ti may have negative elements.
Secondly, in addition to the accuracy of the rationale, we
also measured the information loss of using the decision tree
to represent a CNN, as a supplementary evaluation. A met-
ric is the classi cation accuracy. Because  h(xi) denotes
the prediction of yi based on the best child in the second
tree layer, we regarded  h( ) as the output of the tree and we
evaluated the discrimination power of  h( ). We used values
of  h(xi) for classi cation and compared its classi cation
accuracy with the accuracy of the CNN. Another metric,
namely the prediction error, measures the error of the es-
timated value  h(xi) w.r.t the true value yi. We computed
the prediction error as Ei +[| h(xi)  yi|]/(maxi yi  
mini yi), where we normalized the error using the value
range of yi.
Evaluation for nodes in different layers: The above three
metrics evaluate decision modes (nodes) in the second layer
of the decision tree. Because nodes in lower layers encode
more  ne-grained decision modes, we extended the three
metrics to evaluate nodes in low layers. When we evaluated
nodes in the k-th layer, we temporarily constructed a new
tree by removing all nodes above the k-th layer and directly
connecting the root node to nodes in the k-th layer. Thus,
we can apply the evaluation to the new tree.
Explanations based on the decision tree: Decision
modes in the learned decision tree objectively re ected the
knowledge hidden inside a CNN. Table 1 shows the struc-
ture of the decision tree by listing numbers of nodes in dif-
ferent layers of the decision tree. Fig. 5 visualizes deci-
sion modes in the decision tree. Fig. 6 shows distributions
of object-part contributions to the CNN prediction, which
were estimated using nodes in the second layer of decision
trees.
breast
forehead
nape
tail
average
2nd layer
0.028
0.004
0.013
0.005
0.013
5th layer
0.024
0.004
0.010
0.006
0.011
10th layer
0.022
0.004
0.010
0.005
0.010
50th layer
0.018
0.003
0.008
0.005
0.009
100th layer
0.019
0.003
0.008
0.005
0.009
Table 2. Errors of object-part contributions based on nodes in the
2nd/5th/10th/50th/100th layer of the decision tree. We use the er-
ror of object-part contributions to evaluate the estimated rationale
of a prediction. The CNN was learned using bird images of the
CUB200 dataset.
Dataset
2nd
5th
10th
50th
100th
leaves
VGG-16
ILSVRC Animal-Part
0.23
0.30
0.36
0.52
0.65
1.00
VOC Part
0.22
0.30
0.36
0.53
0.67
1.00
CUB200-2011
0.21
0.26
0.28
0.33
0.37
1.00
VGG-M
VOC Part
0.35
0.38
0.46
0.63
0.78
1.00
CUB200-2011
0.44
0.44
0.46
0.59
0.63
1.00
VGG-S
VOC Part
0.33
0.35
0.41
0.63
0.80
1.00
CUB200-2011
0.40
0.40
0.43
0.48
0.52
1.00
AlexNet
VOC Part
0.37
0.38
0.47
0.66
0.82
1.00
CUB200-2011
0.47
0.47
0.47
0.58
0.66
1.00
Table 3. Average  tness of contribution distributions based on
nodes in the 2nd/5th/10th/50th/100th layer and leaf nodes. We use
the  tness of contribution distributions to evaluate the accuracy of
the estimated rationale of a prediction.
Average classi cation accuracy
Dataset
CNN
2nd
5th
10th
50th
100th
leaves
VGG-16
ILSVRC Animal-Part
96.7
94.4
89.0
88.7
88.6
88.7
87.8
VOC Part
95.4
94.2
91.0
90.1
89.8
89.4
88.2
CUB200-2011
96.5
91.5
92.2
88.3
88.6
88.9
85.3
VGG-M
VOC Part
94.2
95.7
94.2
93.1
93.0
92.6
90.8
CUB200-2011
96.0
97.2
96.8
96.0
95.2
94.9
93.5
VGG-S
VOC Part
95.5
92.7
92.6
91.3
90.2
88.8
86.1
CUB200-2011
95.8
95.4
94.9
93.1
93.4
93.6
88.8
AlexNet
VOC Part
93.9
90.7
88.6
88.6
87.9
86.2
84.1
CUB200-2011
95.4
94.9
94.2
94.3
92.8
92.0
90.0
Average prediction error
A
Dataset
2nd
5th
10th
50th
100th
leaves
VGG-16
ILSVRC Animal-Part
0.052
0.064
0.063
0.049
0.034
0.00
VOC Part
0.052
0.066
0.070
0.051
0.035
0.00
CUB200-2011
0.075
0.099
0.101
0.087
0.083
0.00
VGG-M
VOC Part
0.053
0.051
0.051
0.034
0.019
0.00
CUB200-2011
0.036
0.037
0.038
0.035
0.030
0.00
VGG-S
VOC Part
0.047
0.047
0.045
0.035
0.019
0.00
CUB200-2011
0.045
0.046
0.050
0.051
0.038
0.00
AlexNet
VOC Part
0.055
0.058
0.055
0.038
0.020
0.00
CUB200-2011
0.044
0.044
0.045
0.039
0.033
0.00
Table 4. Average classi cation accuracy and average prediction er-
ror based on nodes in the 2nd/5th/10th/50th/100th layer and leaf
nodes of the tree. We use the classi cation accuracy and the pre-
diction error to measure the information loss when using a decision
tree to represent a CNN.
Table 4 evaluates the information loss when we use the
decision tree to represent a CNN. Metrics of the average
classi cation accuracy, the average prediction error are used
for evaluation. Tables 2 and 3 use errors of object-part con-
tributions and the average  tness of contribution distribu-
tions, respectively, to evaluate the accuracy of the estimated
rationales based on nodes in different tree layers.
Gen-
erally speaking, because  ne-grained decision modes are
close to the image-speci c rationale,  ne-grained decision
modes usually yielded lower error prediction rates. How-
ever,  ne-grained decision modes did not exhibit higher ac-
curacy in classi cation. It is because our method is designed
to mine common decision modes for objects of a certain cat-
egory, and ignores random/negative images, which is differ-
ent from the discriminative learning of classi ers.
6. Conclusion and discussions
In this study, we use a decision tree to explain CNN pre-
dictions at the semantic level. We have developed a method
to revise a CNN and built a tight coupling of the CNN and
a decision tree. The proposed decision tree encodes deci-
sion modes of the CNN as quantitative rationales for each
CNN prediction. Our method does not need any annota-
tions of object parts or textures in training images to guide
the learning the CNN. We have tested our method in differ-
ent benchmark datasets, and experiments have proved the
effectiveness of our approach.
Note that theoretically, the decision tree just provides an
approximate explanation for CNN predictions, instead of
an accurate reconstruction of CNN representation details.
There are two reasons. Firstly, without accurate object-part
annotations to supervised the learning of CNNs, the  lter
loss can only roughly make each  lter to represent an ob-
ject part. The  lter may produce incorrect activations in a
few challenging images. Secondly, the decision mode in
each node ignores insigni cant object-part  lters to ensure
a sparse representation of the decision mode.