Towards falsi able interpretability research
Matthew L. Leavitt 
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, California
ito@fb.com
Ari S. Morcos 
Facebook AI Research
Menlo Park, California
arimorcos@fb.com
Abstract
Methods for understanding the decisions of and mechanisms underlying deep neural net-
works (DNNs) typically rely on building intuition by emphasizing sensory or semantic
features of individual examples. For instance, methods aim to visualize the components of
an input which are  important  to a network s decision, or to measure the semantic properties
of single neurons. Here, we argue that interpretability research suffers from an over-reliance
on intuition-based approaches that risk and in some cases have caused illusory progress
and misleading conclusions. We identify a set of limitations that we argue impede meaning-
ful progress in interpretability research, and examine two popular classes of interpretability
methods saliency and single-neuron-based approaches that serve as case studies for how
overreliance on intuition and lack of falsi ability can undermine interpretability research.
To address these concerns, we propose a strategy to address these impediments in the form
of a framework for strongly falsi able interpretability research. We encourage researchers
to use their intuitions as a starting point to develop and test clear, falsi able hypotheses,
and hope that our framework yields robust, evidence-based interpretability methods that
generate meaningful advances in our understanding of DNNs.
1
Introduction
In so far as a scienti c statement speaks about reality, it must be falsi able: and in so
far as it is not falsi able, it does not speak about reality.
-Karl Popper
The Logic of Scienti c Discovery (Popper, 2005)
The complexity and high-dimensionality of deep neural networks (DNNs) makes them challenging to un-
derstand. One approach for understanding such systems is to extrapolate from intuitions about simpler,
lower-dimensional systems. Mapping abstract quantities into concrete sensory forms, such as by visualization,
can also be a powerful cognitive aid. However, looks are often deceiving and unchecked extrapolation can
easily lead one astray.
The Gaussian (normal) distribution provides a vivid example of the pitfalls of extrapolating intuitions about
low-dimensional systems to higher dimensions. A one-dimensional Gaussian distribution is perhaps the most
familiar data distribution. Its iconic bell-like silhouette is ubiquitous across textbooks, technical publications,
and lay reports of polls and statistics. Its one-dimensional shape extrapolates intuitively into two-dimensions:
similar to an idealized mountain on a relief map. One might then expect that the  shape  of a Gaussian remains
consistent as its dimensionality increases, with the majority of its mass lying close to the origin, with mass
falling off like a bell curve as distance from the origin increases. Counterintuitively, however, most of the mass
of a high-dimensional Gaussian is concentrated in a thin band at a constant distance from the origin. Thus the
closest analogy for the shape of a high-dimensional Gaussian distribution is that of a soap bubble, or spherical
shell: a fundamentally different structure than that of low-dimensional Gaussians (Blum et al., 2020; Husz r,
2017; Vershynin, 2018).
Intuition is the foundation upon which comprehensive understanding is built. But, as the example of the
Gaussian distribution shows, unveri ed intuition can be misleading. The basis of one s intuition must be
veri ed at every iteration of extrapolation. While intuition helps reveal what the important questions are, those
 Equal contribution
 Work performed as part of the Facebook AI Residency program
arXiv:2010.12016v1  [cs.CY]  22 Oct 2020
questions need to be addressed with strong, falsi able hypotheses. This applies to all science, including deep
learning.
The nonlinearity of DNNs renders them resistant to being described and understood using analytical methods,
leading researchers to rely instead on empirical approaches. A breadth of such approaches have been developed,
typically referred to using the umbrella terms  interpretability  or  explainability  (Yosinski et al., 2015; Bau
et al., 2017; Olah et al., 2018; Donnelly and Roegiest, 2019; Radford et al., 2017; Erhan et al., 2009; Zeiler
and Fergus, 2014; Karpathy et al., 2016; Amjad et al., 2018; Dhamdhere et al., 2019; Olah et al., 2020, 2017;
Zhou et al., 2015, 2019; Gunning, 2017; Samek et al., 2017; Do ilovi c et al., 2018; Lakkaraju et al., 2017;
Vellido et al., 2012; Cadamuro et al., 2016; Montavon et al., 2018; Guidotti et al., 2018; Lipton, 2018; Hohman
et al., 2019; Roscher et al., 2020). Many of these methods rely on building intuition by emphasizing sensory
or semantic features of individual examples, for instance by visualizing the components of an input which are
 important  to a network s decision (Springenberg et al., 2015; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Fong and Vedaldi, 2017;
Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2014; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Sundararajan
et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Dabkowski and Gal, 2017; Ancona et al., 2018), or characterizing semantic
properties of individual DNN neurons (Amjad et al., 2018; Meyes et al., 2019; Morcos et al., 2018b; Zhou
et al., 2015, 2018; Bau et al., 2017; Karpathy et al., 2016; Na et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2017; Rafegas
et al., 2019). However, these practices make two assumptions that we argue are too frequently unveri ed in
interpretability research: the assumption that a method faithfully represents meaningful properties of the model
it is applied to, and the assumption that individual instances or examples faithfully represent the phenomena
they are being used to illustrate. And their lack of veri cation is symptomatic of a more general lack of
empirical rigour that impedes interpretability research.
In this position paper we discuss a set of impediments to robust interpretability research: a lack of concrete,
falsi able hypotheses; the abundance and seductive allure of visualization; under-veri cation of the principles
upon which interpretability methods are based; a lack of quanti able approaches; and a lack user research for
human veri cation (Section 2). We next review two case studies in the literature which exemplify the pitfalls
of pursuing un(der)veri ed intuitions in deep learning, and perform a "post-mortem" to identify and explain
the impediments that led to misleading conclusions (Sections 3 and 4). We then articulate a strategy to address
these impediments in the form of a framework for robust, falsi able interpretability research (Section 5). And
we  nish by applying our framework to strengthen an example hypothesis (Section 6).
The motivation for this paper is not unprecedented; pleas have previously been made for greater rigor in the
conduct and communication of machine learning research more broadly (Lipton and Steinhardt, 2018; Forde
and Paganini, 2019), and in interpretability in particular (Doshi-Velez and Kim, 2017; Lipton, 2018). Both
Lipton (2018) and Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017), motivated by a lack of consensus and rigor regarding the
de nition, aims, and practices of interpretability research, sought to clarify these factors. In the intervening
time since these publications, the technical shortcomings of the approaches in our case studies have precipitated,
and many of them have been amended or alternative approaches have been developed. We think it s important
not just to amend theses technical shortcomings, but also to analyze them so that we can generalize across
cases to identify the impediments that allowed these technical shortcomings to arise in the  rst place, and
determine how we can conduct interpretability research in a manner that avoids these impediments. As
such, the recommendations in this paper focus more speci cally on interpretability practices and less on the
de nitions and aims that were key parts of Lipton (2018) and Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017). Our core aim
is to articulate concrete ways of "doing good science" in the context of interpretability research, by way of
referencing both exemplary techniques and cautionary tales.
We emphasize that we are not arguing that intuition should be dispensed with altogether; intuition is essential
for building understanding, and all else being equal, an intuitive method is strictly preferable to an unintuitive
method. We are instead arguing that unveri ed intuition and other aspects of interpretability research can
facilitate misapprehension. Accordingly, the goal of this paper is to prevent misdirected effort, better realize
the potential of useful approaches, and facilitate more impactful research through the application of scienti c
rigor.
2
Impediments to falsi able interpretability research
Here, we discuss a set of impediments to interpretability research whose resolution would improve the
robustness and reliability of our methods and the knowledge they generate. The primary impediment is an
underemphasis on clear, speci c, testable, and most critically, falsi able hypotheses. This includes a lack of
concrete null and alternative outcomes in the formulation of interpretability-guided hypotheses. We note that
2
an interpretability method itself doesn t need to be used to test a hypothesis directly; it can provide an intuition
that forms the basis of a hypothesis that is testable with other methods.
Not only are interpretability methods underutilized for hypothesis formulation, but the methods themselves
are too often left insuf ciently scrutinized. Speci cally, they re not veri ed as being important for DNN
function for example the assumption that some property of a single neuron is consequential to the behavior
of the network. We believe that this issue is exacerbated by the innate visual appeal of many methods, which
can provide a potentially false sense of comprehension, serving as an accelerant for unveri ed approaches.
The abundance and seductive allure of visualization can be another impediment to robust interpretability
research. Finding compelling, intuitive ways of representing information is critical for building understanding
(Tufte and Graves-Morris, 1983; Victor, 2014), and many interpretability methods produce rich, stimulating
visualizations (Mordvintsev et al., 2015a,b; Gatys et al., 2016; Olah et al., 2018, 2017, 2020; Gatys et al., 2015;
Zeiler and Fergus, 2014). But the illustrative power of visualization is a double-edged sword: an evocative
graphic can elicit a strong feeling of comprehension regardless of whether the graphic faithfully represents the
phenomenon it is attempting to depict. This makes interpretability a domain in which it is particularly easy to
fall prey to unveri ed intuitions, and emphasizes the importance of faithful visualization.
Lack of quanti cation also impedes interpretability research. While not all methods can be quanti ed, it s hard
to move beyond intuition without quanti cation. Quanti cation relates directly to the issue of veri cation,
because quanti cation is often essential for veri cation. Anecdotal inspection of visualizations is not a
method that scales to the number of scenarios that need to be evaluated to robustly verify a phenomenon.
The number of models, data samples, hyperparameter con gurations, and so on the very factors that make
deep learning effective make this untenable. Furthermore, visual inspection presents risks. It can lead to
cherry picking intentionally or unintentionally samples or instances that over-emphasize certain features
or properties. It can also serve as a Rorschach test for a researcher, reinforcing their biases and adding
unnecessary researcher degrees of freedom (Simmons et al., 2011).3
The  nal impediment regards the importance of user research for human veri cation. Despite some inter-
pretability methods being designed with the stated intent to provide actionable explanations to humans, many
studies neglect to conduct controlled experiments using human subjects to evaluate the quality and utility of
these methods.
3
Case study: The misdirection of saliency
 Saliency  methods (also known as feature attribution methods) refer to a collection of approaches that attempt
to provide the user with insight as to  why  a DNN made a speci c decision (i.e. performed an instance of
inference) by identifying the features or parts of the input that are most relevant (or  salient ) to the model s
output, typically by using some version of the gradient of the output with regard to the input (Springenberg
et al., 2015; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Fong and Vedaldi, 2017; Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2014;
Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Dabkowski
and Gal, 2017; Ancona et al., 2018; Adebayo et al., 2018). Saliency methods generate rich, visually-appealing
annotations or transformations of input samples. For example, a saliency method applied to a network trained
for object recognition might generate a heatmap across an example image of a cat that highlights the cat s ears,
leading to the conclusion that ears are the most salient aspect of the image for the network s determination of
 catness . Such a rich yet straightforward visualization strongly appeals to intuition. Indeed, the widespread
study and application of saliency methods speaks to their intuitive appeal (Springenberg et al., 2015; Selvaraju
et al., 2017; Fong and Vedaldi, 2017; Baehrens et al., 2010; Simonyan et al., 2014; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014;
Shrikumar et al., 2017; Sundararajan et al., 2017; Smilkov et al., 2017; Dabkowski and Gal, 2017; Ancona
et al., 2018; Yamashita et al., 2018; Rajpurkar et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017, 2020; Puri et al., 2019; Mott
et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2016b; Iyer et al., 2018; Greydanus et al., 2018; Nikulin et al., 2019).
But recent studies have cast doubt on their reliability (Alqaraawi et al., 2020; Kindermans et al., 2017;
Sundararajan et al., 2017; Binder et al., 2016; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Chandrasekaran et al., 2017; Adebayo
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Atrey et al., 2019). Sundararajan et al. (2017); Binder et al. (2016); Shrikumar
et al. (2017) identi ed that many studies of saliency methods lack a clear baseline for comparison (i.e. null
3Researcher degrees of freedom are described by Simmons et al. (2011) as follows:  In the course of collecting and
analyzing data, researchers have many decisions to make: Should more data be collected? Should some observations
be excluded? Which conditions should be combined and which ones compared? Which control variables should be
considered? Should speci c measures be combined or transformed or both?  All of these factors can encourage misleading
conclusions.
3
hypothesis), a necessary condition for robust interpretability research. The notice of its absence presaged
larger issues with saliency methods.
For saliency methods to be useful, they need to re ect meaningful properties of both the data and the networks
to which they re applied. For example, if an input and a baseline (i.e. control image) differ in one feature
and the network has different predictions for the input and baseline, then the different feature should be
identi ed as salient; likewise if a DNN does not depend on some feature, that feature should have zero salience.
Sundararajan et al. (2017) identi ed that many saliency methods fail to exhibit this pair of traits, which they
term  sensitivity . The lack of sensitivity indicates that some saliency methods are prone to false negative and
false positive assessments of the relevance of input features.
Saliency methods also need to re ect invariances of the networks to which they re applied. Take the example
of networks with different architectures or parameters but identical output behavior across a dataset, which
we term to be functionally equivalent. If two networks are functionally equivalent in this manner, a saliency
method should generate identical results for the two networks. Sundararajan et al. (2017) refer to this as
implementation invariance, and showed that many saliency methods do not exhibit this property. This concept
can also be extended to the input data: saliency methods should be invariant to input transformations that do
not affect model predictions or weights, a property that (Kindermans et al., 2017) found is not obeyed by many
saliency methods. These results indicate that many saliency methods do not re ect meaningful properties of
the systems they are used to understand.
Perhaps most importantly, saliency methods are intended to help understand DNNs. Accordingly, they are
only useful for this purpose if they provide information about the data with regards to the model, not just the
data in isolation. Adebayo et al. (2018) examined a suite of saliency methods and found that many of them
produced nearly identical saliency maps even when all the model s parameters were reinitialized or the models
were trained on label-shuf ed data. They also used an edge detector as an additional control, because edge
detectors are not speci c to either models or training data, and found that the outputs of the saliency methods
were in many cases very similar to those of the edge detector. Because gradient-based methods naturally
emphasize edges, and because edges are inherently salient to humans (Henderson, 2003; Geisler, 2008; Bansal
et al., 2013), this means that saliency methods will likely generate maps which appear consistent with human
experience, regardless of whether they re ect meaningful properties of the model, undermining their primary
purpose of providing insight about a model s decision. Put another way, these methods provided the answer
we wanted to hear regardless of whether or not it was true.
Saliency methods are intended to provide humans with an understanding of  why  a DNN made a decision.
Accordingly, providing humans with the results of saliency methods should improve their ability to reason
about and/or predict the behavior of DNNs. Chandrasekaran et al. (2017) used a Visual Question Answering
(VQA) task and found that providing humans with saliency maps for the image and/or words in a data sample
do not improve subjects  predictions of the DNN s behavior. A subsequent study (Alqaraawi et al., 2020)
found that saliency maps only weakly improve participants  abilities to anticipate a network s output for new
images. These studies call into question the ef cacy of saliency for achieving its stated goal and highlight the
necessity of verifying the human side of interpretability methods. It is possible that saliency methods lack
utility for aiding human predictions because they generate outputs that appear meaningful to humans but are
unrelated to the models, indicating that rigorous methodological controls and human veri cation are two sides
of the same coin.
It is unfortunate that many saliency methods have not held up to scrutiny, especially given their application to
extremely sensitive settings such as medical imaging (Seo, 2019; Amit et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2017, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2017; Mahapatra et al., 2016; Rajpurkar et al., 2017; Yamashita et al., 2018; Karargyris et al.,
2019), which present a signi cant safety risk if deployed uncritically. Thankfully, there has been meaningful
progress in assessing and developing robust saliency methods. Kindermans et al. (2017); Adebayo et al. (2018);
Arras et al. (2019); Yeh et al. (2019); Hooker et al. (2019); Sanchez-Lengeling et al. (2020) in particular
provide guidance for verifying interpretability methods4 and/or develop robust methods, and the work of
Chandrasekaran et al. (2017); Doshi-Velez and Kim (2017); Alqaraawi et al. (2020) provide examples of how
to evaluate human-relevance.
4It bears mentioning that some studies identifying limitations in saliency methods used their discoveries to design
newer, more robust saliency methods, which were then in turn shown to have signi cant limitations. In our view, this
demonstrates the critical roles of iteration and replication in scienti c research.
4
4
Case study: Single units and (sub)optimal examples
While saliency seeks to explain how a model made a decision with regard to a single input, our next case
study examines a group of interpretability methods that aim to build intuitions for the broader mechanisms by
which DNNs function (Zhou et al., 2015; Rafegas et al., 2019; Erhan et al., 2009; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014;
Simonyan et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016a; Olah et al., 2017, 2018; Amjad et al.,
2018; Meyes et al., 2019; Morcos et al., 2018b; Zhou et al., 2015, 2018; Bau et al., 2017; Karpathy et al.,
2016; Na et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2017; Rafegas et al., 2019; Olah et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2016b;
Dosovitskiy and Brox, 2016; Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2014). DNNs are extremely high-dimensional systems,
and as the opening example with the Gaussian distribution demonstrated, it is challenging to mentally navigate
high-dimensional spaces. This challenge is a strong motivator for humans to abandon high-dimensional
thinking in favor of the familiarity and comfort of low-dimensional signals. This can in turn encourage
the properties of individual units to be deployed as an explanation of  what  a network is  doing , which
assumes the unit is both representative of other units and responsible for some delineated sub-component
of the network s behavior. Many of these methods make claims based solely on visualization or qualitative
properties (Zhou et al., 2015; Rafegas et al., 2019; Erhan et al., 2009; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Simonyan
et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016a; Olah et al., 2017, 2018, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2016b;
Dosovitskiy and Brox, 2016; Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2014; Hohman et al., 2019). We start by examining how
our falsi ability framework applies to visualizations.
Visualization is a common method for building intuition about the properties of single units. In the most basic
approach, one simply identi es the input sample(s) (e.g. images) or sample subregions that maximally activate
a given neuron (Zhou et al., 2015; Rafegas et al., 2019). Another approach uses optimization to generate
samples that maximize unit activations (Erhan et al., 2009; Zeiler and Fergus, 2014; Simonyan et al., 2014;
Yosinski et al., 2015; Nguyen et al., 2016a; Olah et al., 2017, 2018, 2020; Nguyen et al., 2016b; Dosovitskiy
and Brox, 2016; Mahendran and Vedaldi, 2014). While these methods may be useful for building intuition,
they can also encourage three potentially misleading assumptions: that the visualization is representative of the
neuron s behavior; that the neuron is responsible for a clearly delineated portion of the task or the network s
behavior; and that the neuron s behavior is representative of the network s behavior.
To illustrate how visualization can provide misleading intuitions about a neuron s properties, we summarize
Husz r (2017) s lucid example: If a neuron responds to images of Gaussian noise, a method that generates
the  optimal  input for that neuron may end up generating a gray square, which is very different from the
samples it most strongly responds to: white noise images which look like static. (Olah et al., 2017; Nguyen
et al., 2016b) are also motivated by the potential of single instances to generate misleading conclusions.
In addition to visualization methods potentially being misleading, they are often under-utilized for informing
and evaluating strong, falsi able hypotheses. While demonstrating that an optimal sample exists or that an
optimal sample exhibits certain qualities are technically falsi able hypotheses, these are not strong hypotheses.
Stronger hypotheses would relate to network function instead of just proof of existence. It seems that
visualization methods have a dual de cit when it comes to testing: their  representativeness  is not always
tested, nor are they used to guide or test hypotheses.
Non-visualization-based methods for characterizing the behavior of individual neurons typically by charac-
terizing the distribution of the neuron s activity over data classes or values of a data feature are myriad and
ubiquitous (Amjad et al., 2018; Meyes et al., 2019; Morcos et al., 2018b; Zhou et al., 2015, 2018; Bau et al.,
2017; Karpathy et al., 2016; Na et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2017; Rafegas et al., 2019). Because the practice is
imported from neuroscience (Sherrington, 1906; Adrian, 1926; Granit, 1955; Hubel and Wiesel, 1959; Barlow,
1972; Kandel et al., 2000), we will abide by their lexicon and collectively refer to these practices as measuring
 selectivity . Selectivity-based methods have a similar allure as visualization, but the appeal is semantic
instead of sensory. One notable study identi ed a neuron selective for sentiment in an LSTM network trained
on a word prediction task (Radford et al., 2017). Another found individual neurons selective for cats faces
and human bodies (Radford et al., 2017). (Olah et al., 2017, 2018, 2020) propose single unit selectivity as a
building block for understanding DNNs. The in uence of these studies demonstrates the widespread appeal
of selectivity (Amjad et al., 2018; Meyes et al., 2019; Morcos et al., 2018b; Zhou et al., 2015, 2018; Bau
et al., 2017; Karpathy et al., 2016; Na et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2017; Rafegas et al., 2019; Olah et al., 2017,
2018, 2020). But neither semantic abstraction nor quanti cation completely avoid the pitfalls of visualization,
because they can still encourage the assumptions that a neuron is responsible for a clearly delineated portion
of the task or the network s function, or is representative of a network s behavior.
5
A number of recent studies examining class selectivity a form of selectivity de ned as how variable a
neuron s responses are across different classes of data samples have demonstrated that the properties of
single neurons may not robustly account for the behavior of networks Morcos et al. (2018b) used single unit
ablation and other techniques to demonstrate that a network s test set generalization is negatively correlated
(or uncorrelated) with the class selectivity of its units, suggesting that highly-selective units are no more
important (or perhaps even less important) than confusing, non-selective units. Amjad et al. (2018) con rmed
these results for single unit ablation, but also performed cumulative ablation analyses where multiple units
are ablated, the results of which suggested that selectivity is mildly bene cial. This dichotomy presents one
example of how it can be dif cult to extrapolate from single neurons to networks, in this case because of
redundancy across units.
Similar results have been shown for models trained on NLP tasks. Dalvi et al. (2019) found that ablating units
selective for linguistic features causes greater performance de cits than ablating less-selective units. Donnelly
and Roegiest (2019) found that ablating Radford et al. (2017) s  sentiment neuron  has minimal impact on
the network s ability to detect and label sentiment. These results certainly cast doubt on the assumptions
that individual neurons contribute to clearly delineated portions of the network s behavior and that individual
neurons are representative of the network, but they are also limited by their reliance on the method of single
unit ablation.
As detailed in Leavitt and Morcos (2020a), single unit ablation in trained networks can only address the
effects of inactivating a neuron in a network whose training process assumed that the neuron was present. This
presents two key limitations to investigating the causal role of selectivity: single unit ablation is unable to
address whether the presence of selectivity is bene cial (i.e. is it suf cient), and it is unable to address whether
networks need to learn selectivity to function properly. With these limitations in mind, Leavitt and Morcos
(2020a) conducted a study in which they regularized against class selectivity in the loss function sidestepping
the shortcomings of single unit ablation to examine the causal role of class selectivity in network function.
They found that class selectivity is largely unnecessary for network function, and reducing it can even improve
network performance. They also found in a follow-up study that reducing class selectivity increases robustness
to naturalistic corruptions of input data (Leavitt and Morcos, 2020b). These results demonstrate that networks
do not need to learn class selectivity, and that in some cases learning class selectivity can impair network
function, indicating that examining class selectivity in single neurons may be a red herring with regards to
understanding network function.
The studies we detailed support the notion that the tractable, semantic allure of single neurons  low-dimensional
representations can encourage an overreliance on intuition. And while these studies question the functional
relevance of class selectivity, we view them more broadly as a bulwark against the intuitive appeal of focusing
on single neuron properties. This suggests that researchers should focus on properties that exist across
neurons distributed, high-dimensional representations and highlights the need to develop tools to make
these properties more tractable and accessible to intuition. Agrawal et al. (2014); Wang et al. (2016a); Alain
and Bengio (2018); Morcos et al. (2018a); Fong and Vedaldi (2018) are examples of studies that attempt to
better understand DNNs by examining distributed representations.
5
Best practices for robust, falsi able interpretability research
We have attempted to illustrate how the seductive appeal of intuition and a lack of veri cation and falsi ability
have resulted in misleading conclusions and illusory progress in two domains of interpretability research:
saliency and single neuron-based approaches. What follows is a high-level framework for best practices to
help ensure robust, falsi able interpretability research. These practices are guided by the impediments to
interpretability research presented in Section 2, and by the techniques and interventions that revealed the
limitations of saliency and single unit-based approaches. We provide practical examples and